Add OTel Anti-Patterns blog post. Ref: #4043 (#4044)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2024/otel-collector-anti-patterns/index.md

---
title: OpenTelemetry Collector Anti-Patterns

> linkTitle: OTel Collector Anti-Patterns

Reviewer: I'd use "antipatterns", with no hyphen and lower case.

date: 2024-02-23
author: >-
  [Adriana Villela](https://github.com/avillela) (Lightstep),

canonical_url: https://adri-v.medium.com/43dca4a857a0
---

![House on stilts against ocean and mountain backdrop](house-on-stilts.jpg)

The [OpenTelemetry Collector](/docs/collector) is one of my favorite
OpenTelemetry (OTel) components. It’s a flexible and powerful data pipeline
which allows you to ingest OTel data from one or more sources, transform it
(including batching, filtering, and masking), and export it to one or more
observability backends for analysis. It’s vendor-neutral. It’s extensible,
meaning that you can create your own custom components for it. What’s there not
to like?

> And like many tools out there, it is also very easy to fall into some bad

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, as it happens with many tools out there, it is also very easy to fall into
some bad
```

habits. Today, I will dig into five OpenTelemetry Collector anti-patterns, and
how to avoid them. Let’s get started!

## Anti-Patterns

> ### 1- Not using the OpenTelemetry Collector

Reviewer: I wonder if this could come last. It has a nice bottom line message that reminds folks about the benefits of the Collector. Opening with it is a bit shocking, but also valid.

Author: @theletterf Moved to the end. Let me know what you think of the flow with its new spot.

> ### 1- Not using the OpenTelemetry Collector

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure how I feel about this one: there are certainly use-cases where people don't want or can't use a collector. For instance, people collecting data at the edge from IOT devices might have a better time sending data to their backend instead of a local collector, given that resources on that edge might be limited.

I would certainly state that having a Collector is a great general pattern, but not having it isn't necessarily an anti-pattern IMO.

Reviewer: I think it's great to use this one for attention grabbing. I agree that it'd need some explanation after the heading following @jpkrohling 's arguments.

Reviewer 2: The problem is that more people read the titles than the whole text, and that's the message they'll get and pass forward. Perhaps the title could be "1 - Not using the OTel Collector (with exceptions)" or something like that.

filtering.”

Check out some additional Collector benefits:

- **Collectors can enhance the quality of the telemetry emitted by an
  application while also minimizing costs.** For example: sampling spans to
  reduce costs, enriching telemetry with extra metadata, and generating new
  telemetry, such as metrics derived from spans.
- **Using a Collector to ingest telemetry data makes it easy to change to a new
  backend or export the data in a different format.** If we want to change how
  telemetry is being processed or exported, that change happens in one place
  (the Collector!), as opposed to making the same change for multiple
  applications in your organization.
- **Collectors allow you to receive data of various formats and translate to the
  desired format for export.** This can be very handy when transitioning from
  some other telemetry solution to OTel.
- **Collectors allow you to ingest non-application telemetry.** This includes
  logs and non-app metrics from infrastructure like Azure, Prometheus, and
  Cloudwatch.

_Bottom line:_ Using the OpenTelemetry Collector gives you additional
flexibility for managing your telemetry data.

> ### 2- Improper use of Collector Deployment Modes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2- Improper use of Collector deployment modes
```

We use sentence case for headings. Please edit the other headings accordingly.

> It’s not just enough to use a Collector. It’s also about HOW your Collectors are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It’s not just enough to use a Collector. It’s also about _how_ your Collectors are
```

These can then be sent to your Observability backend for monitoring.

### 4- Not using the right Collector Distribution (or not building your own distribution)

There are two official distributions of the OpenTelemetry Collector:
[Core](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector), and
[Contrib](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib).

The Core distribution is a bare-bones distribution of the Collector for OTel
developers to develop and test. It contains a base set of
[extensions](/docs/collector/configuration/#service-extensions),
[connectors](/docs/collector/configuration/#connectors),
[receivers](/docs/collector/configuration/#receivers),
[processors](/docs/collector/configuration/#processors), and
[exporters](/docs/collector/configuration/#exporters).

The Contrib distribution is for non-OTel developers to experiment and learn. It
also extends the Core distribution, and includes components created by
third-parties (including vendors and individual community members), that are
useful to the OpenTelemetry community at large.

> Neither Core nor Contrib is meant to be part of your production workload. Core

Reviewer 2: I don't think that's right. It's correct that we don't recommend contrib to be used in production, but core is certainly recommended, especially if all users need is a distribution with OTLP receivers and exporters, and a couple of processors in between, like the batch processor.

Author: Let me re-word that, because it's not that I'm saying to not use the components here. I'm just saying to not use these as THE distribution.

Author: @jpkrohling re-worded it. Let me know what you think!

is too bare-bones and wouldn’t suit an organization’s needs. Many OpenTelemetry
practitioners, however, deploy Contrib in their respective organizations. But
Contrib has many components, and you likely won’t need every single exporter,
receiver, processor, connector, and extension. That would be overkill, and your

> Collector instance ends up needlessly bloated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Collector instance ends up needlessly bloated, potentially increasing the attack surface.
```

But how do you pick and choose the components that you need? The answer is to
build your own distribution, and you can do that using a tool called the
[OpenTelemetry Collector Builder](/docs/collector/custom-collector/) (OCB). In
addition, at some point, you may need to create your own custom Collector
component, such as a processor or exporter. The OCB allows you to integrate your
custom components AND pick and choose the Contrib components that you need.

It is also worth mentioning that some vendors build their own Collector
distributions. These are OTel Collector distributions that are curated to
Collector components that are specific to that vendor. They may be a combination
of custom, vendor-developed components, and curated Collector Contrib
components. Using vendor-specific distributions ensures that you are using just

> the Collector components that you need, again reducing overall bloat.

Reviewer: You'd add a link to https://opentelemetry.io/ecosystem/distributions/

Author: Added!

_Bottom line:_ Using the right distribution reduces bloat and allows you to
include only the Collector components that you need.

> ### 5- Out-of-date Collectors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 5- Not updating your Collectors
```

addition, at some point, you may need to create your own custom Collector
component, such as a processor or exporter. The OCB allows you to integrate your
custom components AND pick and choose the Contrib components that you need.

It is also worth mentioning that some vendors build their own
[Collector distributions](/ecosystem/distributions/). These are OTel Collector
distributions that are curated to Collector components that are specific to that
vendor. They may be a combination of custom, vendor-developed components, and
curated Collector Contrib components. Using vendor-specific distributions
ensures that you are using just the Collector components that you need, again
reducing overall bloat.

_Bottom line:_ Using the right distribution reduces bloat and allows you to
include only the Collector components that you need.

### 4- Not updating your Collectors

This one’s short and sweet. Keeping software up-to-date is important, and the
Collector is no different! By regularly updating the Collector, it allows you to
stay up-to-date with the latest version so that you can take advantage of new
features, bug fixes, performance improvements, and security fixes.

> ### 5- Not using the OpenTelemetry Collector where appropriate

Author: @theletterf moved this down as number 5 per your suggestion.

Author: @jpkrohling how is this title?

Reviewer: Love it — thanks!

“allows your service to offload data quickly and the collector can take care of
additional handling like retries, batching, encryption or even sensitive data
filtering.”

Check out some additional Collector benefits:

- **Collectors can enhance the quality of the telemetry emitted by an
  application while also minimizing costs.** For example: sampling spans to
  reduce costs, enriching telemetry with extra metadata, and generating new
  telemetry, such as metrics derived from spans.
- **Using a Collector to ingest telemetry data makes it easy to change to a new
  backend or export the data in a different format.** If we want to change how
  telemetry is being processed or exported, that change happens in one place
  (the Collector!), as opposed to making the same change for multiple
  applications in your organization.
- **Collectors allow you to receive data of various formats and translate to the
  desired format for export.** This can be very handy when transitioning from
  some other telemetry solution to OTel.
- **Collectors allow you to ingest non-application telemetry.** This includes
  logs and non-app metrics from infrastructure like Azure, Prometheus, and
  Cloudwatch.

> That being said, there are some use-cases where folks don't want or can't use a

Author: @jpkrohling added some clarification here, and also updated the section heading to better describe this

Reviewer 2: Sounds good now!

---
title: OpenTelemetry Collector Antipatterns
linkTitle: OTel Collector Antipatterns

> date: 2024-02-23

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
date: 2024-03-01
```

Let's have this on Friday, since we will have the KubeCon blog post first, wdyt?
